06/02/2025-Jenkins


* Plugins: (To have a fuctionality)

   → plugins can used to add, remove, disable or enable plugins, that can extend the functionality of Jenkins.

   → when we install plugins in automatic way, the plugins extension is JPI(Jenkins plugins)

   → when we install plugins manuall way, the plugins extension is HPI(Hudson plugin)



* Plugin Installation : There are two way's to install plugin's

                        1. Automatically
 
                        2. Manually



1. Automatically :

   → once we login Jenkins gui, left side you will see the option "manage Jenkins", click on manage Jenkins, in the top "system configuration", can see the plugins.

                    Jenkins gui → manage Jenkins → system configuration → pulgins.


   → Click on plugins, then click on available plugins and search for the plugin which is required.


   →  select the plugin under the list, once selected the plugin list of plugin will be highlated then install the plugin.



2. Manually :

   → Under the pulgins tab, go for available plugin and search for the plugin, click on the plugin which is required.

   → once you click on the plugin, new tab will be open then click in "Release", under the release you will see the various versions of the pulgins.

   → go for the plugin which is required specific version

   → under install option click on "direct link"

   → once you click on the direct plugin will get downloaded to our local machine (or) system

   → when we download plugin in manuall way again we need to deploy it to Jenkins

   → In the gui plugins tab's click on advanced settings, choose file to upload which is downloaded to local machine 




* How to uninstall the plugin..?

   Manage Jenkins → plugins → installed plugins
  
    → search for plugins which we wanted to uninstall

    → select the plugin and then uninstall button will be highlighted

    → once clicked on uninstall, plugin will get unistall.



* How to update the plugin..?

   Manage Jenkins → plugins → Installed plugins

    → Select the plugin and then update button will be highlighted

    → once clicked on updated, plugin will get updated.


     Note : In real time we should not update the plugin directly 

     Reason : their might be challenges will be encountered, it will be recommended to update the plugin with in our local machines, where other team members will not be effected(if 
              anything goes wrong)



* How to create the user..?

   Manage Jenkins → security → users(create, delete, modify users that can log in to this Jenkins)

    → click on user you can see the "+ user", Now it asks the user's detail (Name, password, confirm password, email), then click on create user.



* How to set permissions to thr user.?

   Manage Jenkins → security(secure jebkins define who is allowed to access user system)

     → Click on that, then you will be seeing this "Authoriziation" tab.

     → Add user (To add user), it asks user-id

     → You can see the created user's in existing users.

    → Then give required permission to the user by checking the box(The minimum access to give is overall Read)


* By default what ever we create users for Jenkins will get stored in Jenkins own user database.
  
    → Jenkins own user database is sutaible for samller set-up

    → The other option is LDAP(lightweight Directory Access Protocol)



 To secure our Jenkins server we can below stratagies:

  1. Authorization stratagies:
   
            → By default will be seeing project-based matrix authorization statragy, with this we can manage the authorization based on the options available under strategy.

              eg : credentials, Agent, Job, Run, View..etc


  2. Matrix authorization strategy:
  
            → Matrix authorization allows configuring the lowest level permissions, such as starting new buils, configuring items, or deleting them individually.



  3. RBAC(Role Based Acess Control): on of the way where we can secure the Jenkins




* Jenkins project (project (or) job jOB, both are same (combination of one or more task)

    1. Free Style project: 

         →  Classic, general-purpose job type that checks out from up to one SCM, executes build steps serially, followed by post-build steps like archiving artifacts and sending email 
     
            notifications.


     2. pipeline:

         →  Orchestrates long-running activities that can span multiple build agents. Suitable for building pipelines(formerly known as workflows) and /or organizing complex activities
 
            that do not easily fit in free-style job type.

     
     3. multi-configuration project:
 
         → Suitable for projects that need a large number of different configurations, such as testing on multiple environments, platform-specific builds, etc.


     4. Folder:

         → Creates a container that stores nested items in it. Useful for grouping things together. Unlike view, which is just a filter, a folder creates a separate namespace, so you can
      
           have multiple things of the same name as long as they are in different folders


     5. Multibranch pipeline:

         → creates a set of pipeline projects according to detected branches in one SCM repository.


     6. Organization Folder:

          → Creates a set of multibranch project subfolders by scanning for repositories.



* How to create the job or project:

    → In Jenkins gui to the leftside click on this "Newitem".
   
    → click on New item give the enter an item or job name

    → then select an item type 

  

* the job configuration is consists of general(where we can give information or description) about the project. 

 → source code management(where we will be passing urls of the repositories),

 → Build triggers(in what way we wanted to trigger or build that job),

 → build environment, build steps (where we can add tasks),

 → post-build actions



* How to create free style basic job..?

   → new item → enter item name 

   → select item type and click on ok

   → go to the build steps of the job configuration 

   → click on add build step drop down botton

   → select execute windows batch command type(dir)

   → click on save

   → click on build now(left side option)

   → for output check console output




* Blue ocean.?

   Blue ocean rethinks the Jenkins user experience designed from the ground up forjenkins pipeline and compatiable with freestyle jobs






















      


     



