                                                       * Jenkins Installation Windows Machine *




* Step 1 : Browse to the official Jenkins download page(https://www.jenkins.io/download/).

          → After open the Jenkins page, under the downloading Jenkins section, is a list of installers for the LTS(Long-Term-Support) version of Jenkins

          → Click on the windows Text(link), it will starts download's the server.




* Step 2: Browse to the JDK-21 download page(https://www.oracle.com/in/java/technologies/downloads/)

          → After open the Page, under the java downloads we have an java versions such as Jdk21,jdk23.

          → Click on jdk 21 version and choose windows then Download "x64 Installer", It will start the download jdk21 version.



* Step 3: After Downloading the files Firstly we can give a path of jdk21 version in (windows System-Environments variables)

          → Open windows System-Environments variables in windows search
 
          → select "Environments variables", then click on new in "system varaibles" and give a variablename and variablevalue(path of jdk-file) then click on "ok".
          
          → Now choose a "path" in syaytem variables and click on "edit" then click on "new" and add a path of jdk-21 version file.



* Step 4: Now we can install and the Jenkins file after the installation.

          → Double click on Jenkins file which is downloaded

          → Now we can setup wizard it will install the Jenkins on your computer so click on "Next"

          → In the Destination Folder it shows path of a Jenkins file check and click on "Next"

          → In the service logon credentials , choose "run service as a local system" then click on "Next"

          → In the port section, click on "test port" then click on "Next"

          → In Jenkins version setup ( select a path of jdk which is downloaded new version) then "click on Next"

          → In the custom setup by default Jenkins once check then click "Next"

          → In the ready install just click on the "Install"

          → Now it asks do you want to install click "Yes"



* Step 5: After completing the installation process, you have to unblock Jenkins before you customize and start using it.

          → After installation of Jenkins enter URL(localhost:8080) on your browser.

          → Navigate to the location on your system specified by the unlock Jenkins page.

            (Copy the password from location [entire path]: C:\ProgramData\Jenkins\.jenkins\secrets\initialAdminPassword, where the admin password is stored in a file.

          → To read the data of that file, use the cat (Command) in the terminal like gitbash.

          → Copy the password from the initial admin password file (e.g., Gd2dZd... Alphanumeric).

          → Paste the password in the Administrator password field on the unlock Jenkins page and click Continue to proceed.

          → once you unlock Jenkins, customize and prepare the Jenkins environment.



* Step 6:

      → Click on the Install suggested plugins button to have Jenkins automatically install the most frequently used plugins.

      → After Jenkins finishes installing the plugins, enter the server information on the Create First Admin User page. Click Save and Continue to proceed.

                  Username: admin

                  Password: adminn123

                  Confirm Password: admin123

                  Full Name: your Name

                  Email Address: Your email


      

 Notes : If we want to stop or start the Jenkins server on windows.

         → In windows search bar-search for the "services" and choose Jenkins.

         → After selecting click on Jenkins it show's option like "Stop,Restart,start"

